---
layout: post
title:  My Experience with Ketamine in a Clinical Trial
date: 2023-04-19 19:01:00
description: This article displays written and image descriptions of the phases of my experience of ketamine while enrolled in a clinical trial understanding the psychedelic effects on the brain
tags: ketamine, psychedelics, mind, medicine
categories: blog-post
giscus_comments: true
---

There are currently 217 actively recruiting clinical trials for Ketamine and 43 are accepting healthy volunteers <a href="https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term=Ketamine&recrs=a&age_v=&gndr=&hlth=Y&type=Intr&rslt=&Search=Apply">ClinicalTrials.gov</a>. Interestingly, ketamine has shown preliminary efficacy for numerous conditions related to chronic pain, anesthesia, Parkinson’s disease, and multiple mental health conditions including depression, PTSD, and opioid use disorder and researchers want to understand how it’s working. I am most interested in it’s role in mental health conditions, and I recently participated in one of these trials to help understand the how the doses used for treatment-resistant depression might be working to modulate brain metabolism. This study, by the way, requires clean urinalyses so that researchers can be sure there are no confounding influences from other drugs, including cannabis.  

So, I underwent two MR (magnetic resonance) imaging scans (one day with placebo, one day with ketamine infusion), and I did not know which day I would be experiencing ketamine. On the first day, I was waiting for any odd sensations. Other than questioning the curtains’ movement as they were measuring my blood pressure and performing an EKG in the recovery room, I would find it hard to believe that Ketamine had any psychedelic effects if I did have it.

On Day 2, about 5 minutes into the beginning of the infusion while I was lying awake inside the MR scanner, my first thought was: “wow, okay last week was definitely the placebo.” I broke down my experience into three distinct phases (that I remembered) just a few hours after the experience:

Phase 1: “Going Down”

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/KetaminePhase1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Ketamine Phase 1 depiction of my descent down into a fluid abyss.
</div>

While lying the in the scanner with an IV placed in each arm (one for blood samples and the other for the ketamine infusion), a blood pressure cuff on my right leg, and a pulse oximeter on my left toe, I began to experience in interesting feeling of comfort. Like I was being fully swaddled as my body experienced a sort of heaviness and warmth. I felt as if my body was slowly falling through an ocean (it felt more like falling through a liquid, not quite air), and drifting down for what seemed like a very long time. I just kept going down further, all the while in a state of comfort and relaxation. At some point throughout this journey, however, I found myself questioning whether or not I was physically falling. I remember testing to ensure I could still wiggle my fingers. I then recall telling myself “I’m safe, I’m safe.” I can’t recall ever stopping this journey, but I then experienced my second phase.

Phase 2: “What are those squiggly lines?”

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/KetaminePhase2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Ketamine Phase 2 depiction of my potential "confrontation with my subconscious"
</div>

It started with those squiggly colorful lines that you see when you close your eyes after looking at something bright. Vague lines and shapes, that don’t exactly form anything you can make sense of. I watched these vague lines for a while, just the same way that you might if you’re in a room on your own with nowhere to be, and just looked at them. After some amount of time, after I realized they weren’t magically going to form some object that gave me an epiphany, I began to try to understand what they may be. I wondered if they represented something in my subconscious, as perhaps my Phase 1 journey was taking me exactly there. As the blood pressure cuff went off during that time, I snapped back to my clinical reality momentarily. But only after I began to realize that if I thought hard enough about what those figures may be, I may just have experienced something amazing. Then I entered my final phase.

Phase 3: The Roller Coaster Back to Reality

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/KetaminePhase3.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Ketamine Phase 3 depiction of me riding a roller coaster with a king cobra as the roller coaster cars.
</div>

This is when the nurse, who accompanied me during the entire 3-hour imaging study, told me that I told her “I am so ***** high.” I was experiencing intense waves of sensation throughout my body, most similar to what you feel when you ride a winding roller coaster at Six Flags for the first time. I imagined that I was dipping back down to the bottom of Phase 1, and back up to reality. For whatever reason, I envisioned that I was no longer swaddled, but rather on the back of the wide neck of a king cobra. I didn’t actually ~see~ the cobra, but its what I felt like I was on. Semi-scary, but finally the phase that I associated with “tripping.” At the end of this phase, I slowly began to hear the humming of the scanner in the background. The nurse telling me that it had been 37 minutes since the start of the infusion. Then eventually, it just felt like my first day in the study again…

For the remaining 80 minutes inside of the MR scanner, I began to realize the potential utility of this treatment for people with persistent intrusive or distorted thoughts. Was Phase 2 the place where a person could confront their subconscious and work through it? Importantly, I realized that an epiphany was unlikely to come passively; if I were to overcome a challenging part of my previously subconscious reality, I would have to put effort into what my mental difficulties were. Ideally, I imagine, I would have prepared in the first place while in therapy with a psychologist or psychiatrist so that I could go into my Ketamine experience ready to address these subconscious thoughts.

I also wondered whether I would have any visual hallucinations during this experience. I did not, and I would agree that my experience aligns well with ketamine’s label as a “dissociative” agent. There were times I felt that my body experienced things, but not necessarily that I was the one experiencing them.

In summary, having experienced the psychedelic first-hand, I will be very interested to understand its role in clinical practice for mental health conditions and beyond. I believe there is certainly utility for the right person: someone whose thoughts are pervasive, but they have difficulty overcoming them in the moment. Further, these will be patients who are motivated to seek out the underlying issues and confront them. Gamechanger? Perhaps. But like all treatments, pharmacological or not, there will need to be buy in (belief it will work!) from both the practitioner and the patient and also fit the needs of patient at that given time. 

Disclaimer! This is only MY experience, and certainly not medical advice!
